---
title: Unit 1   Macroeconomics and the World of Finance 
transcript_by: youtube_transcript_api
media: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1yofu6KtER8
---

hello and welcome to my first video on
macroeconomics and financial markets the
reason why I'm producing this video is
because I think a lot of information on
economics currently on YouTube is really
geared toward Western economies and I
think that whenever a Nigerian sort of
official whether it's a Minister for
finance but especially the CBN governor
and comes out with new economic policy
there's you know a really huge debate on
social media and in social environments
about whether it's right or wrong and
sometimes some of these debates are kind
of built on really faulty economic
assumptions so if you really want to be
able to contribute meaningfully to the
debate around economic policy in Nigeria
which is a really serious thing right we
have more people in Nigeria living in
poverty than anywhere in the world with
the poverty capital of the world
we've got slow economic growth we've got
a population rate growing faster than
our economic growth rate and we have a
high level of debts compared to our
revenue so it's really important for as
many people as possible to know the
fundamentals so what I'm going to do in
I hope around 30 minutes is take you
through a whistle-stop tour of the main
principles in macroeconomics by the time
you finish you would have an overview of
almost every main principle of
macroeconomics and will be able to have
more informed conversations about our
joint future enjoy so I was working
about the CBN governor before and the
policies in Nigeria and some of the more
interesting and on Orthodox things I'll
be touching on that he has been able to
develop and deploy over his tenure so
I'm going to be talking about
macroeconomics in the world of finance
as a basic introduction I'll be talking
about savings and Finance I'll be
talking about fiscal policy monetary
policy investments international capital
flows and foreign
change and of course expectation
inflation and interest rates so in the
first unit I'll be putting
macroeconomics into context and talking
about the difference between long run
and short run economics the national
income account which is the subject of a
lot of debate and then aggregate demand
and so what is macroeconomics
macroeconomics is a study of the economy
as a whole and the backdrop of that is
the national indicators that companies
and countries used to make decisions so
there's a few challenges with
macroeconomic information which I'd like
you to be aware of number one is that
economics economists sometimes use
different definitions or different
things so the unemployment rate for
instance in Nigeria and our definition
is different from what some of the other
countries use and also because like
literally the information comes out
every quarter
sometimes as mistakes it's it has to
come out in a really short timeframe so
sometimes you find that countries have
to revise their figures after they've
already bought them out another concept
that I'd like us to get to grips with is
short-run and long-run economic so a
long-run economics is focused on the
average amount of growth over a specific
period of time
so obviously economies go up and down
there's boom and bust cycles so you know
it's the average over a longer period of
time whereas a short to run economics is
what's happening right now currently so
and this is important because policies
are induced faster growth in the medium
term might actually be counterproductive
for the long term so it's important to
think about the current crisis or the
current issues but also have a long term
perspective a long term perspective
aggregate demand and supply is like a
big concept in economics and aggregate
demand is basically the sum total of all
demand in an economy from consumption
plus government spending plus net
exports plus investor
aggregate supply is the total supply to
economy to an economy to meet that
demand and there's two types there's a
short-run aggregate supply and the
long-run aggregate supply and I'll be
talking about this later on individual
so aggregate demand aggregate demands
has a graph and if you're studying
economic so you're taking any economics
exams then this is a graph that you kind
of need to know one of the most
important graphs I would say and it's
downward sloping graph and it compares
the general price level to the rate of
GDP and GDP is always equal to aggregate
demand so the formula how to calculate
GDP which we'll be talking about later
is the same as aggregate demand so arise
in any of the factors of either
consumption investment government
spending or net exports will shift the
the aggregate demand curve to the rights
and if any of them reduce then it will
shift it to the left and they'll be
coinciding changes in the general price
level as well and these are just some of
the causes of aggregate demand shocks
what could change the level of aggregate
demand and basically when you're
thinking about things that change the
level of aggregate demand you're
thinking about things that change any of
the components of aggregate demand so
anything that changes consumption
investment government spending on the
exports and things like a recession
things like a rise or fall of the
interest rate a thing like a global
credit crunch where companies can access
credit etc and those will shift
aggregate so these are some of the
things that can cause a fall in
aggregate demand an increase in
aggregate demand and as you can see it's
quite intuitive because they're the
things that affect the factors that add
up to aggregate surrounded
when we talk about aggregate supply
aggregate supply measures the volume of
goods and services produced every year
an aggregate supply represents the
ability of an economy to deliver goods
and services to meet demand there's two
graphs to remember for aggregate supply
during the short-run sellers of goods
are receiving higher prices for their
products without a proportionate
increase in the cost of what they're
using to produce those products or their
inputs so the higher the price level the
more these sellers will be willing to
supply so you get the curved graph
however in the long run things kind of
balance out right and you have a
straight long-run aggregate supply curve
in the long run because in the short-run
of course there's a lag between the
there's a lag between the potential
outputs of a compare of an economy and
the price level but that levels out in
the long run now we're on to the sorts
of meats of this unit which is the
national income accounts and you know we
obsess over the national income account
in Nigeria the national income account
are all those fundamental aggregate
statistics that we use to measure the
economy and you know this was sort of
such a breakthrough in economics because
centuries ago we weren't measuring these
factors and people wondered why there
were periods in time where people got
poorer and where there was a lot of
poverty where they were riots so this
was a huge breakthrough when countries
around the world decided to start
measuring the national income account
so the most important the one that you
hear all the time the one that we
debates about the one that we obsess
about is GDP and GDP is a total monetary
or market value of all finished goods
and services produced within a country's
borders over a particular timeframe so
it's basically like you know how much a
country makes and national income is
actually measured in three ways we can
measure the income we can measure the
output or we can measure the expenditure
and just as a note on GDP GDP is used as
an indicator of a company country's
economic strength G&I however shows the
total income received by a company a
country and that's used to indicate the
economic strengths of the residents of
that country so I'm going to talk about
for the last bit of this you know I'm
going to talk about the effects of
inflation and how we counter the effects
of inflation on GDP and inflation is
basically the rise in price level that
happens over time so I'm sure you hear
your parents or like really old people
saying that or when I was your age I
only earned like 500 naira a year or
something really you know dramatic like
that you hear them saying stuff like oh
you know I used to fly tonight I used to
play from Lagos to London for five nine
and you know the price level of the
naira the dye Geryon currency has
definitely risen over time and we have
to when we're studying economics these
are some of the things that we take into
consideration inflation high levels of
inflation are destructive right they're
disruptive to people's savings I think
that they call inflation like the silent
robber so we try and keep our levels of
inflation under control we try and
monitor our levels of inflation analyze
our levels of inflation and we've
actually developed GDP measures
kinds of sort of mitigating measures to
make sure that whenever we're looking at
an economy especially like Nigeria where
we have relatively high levels of
inflation we're actually taking that
into consideration so the first major
consideration is the real versus nominal
GDP the nominal GDP is of market value
of goods and services produced in an
economy that is not adjusted for
inflation the real GDP the one that we
feel on the streets is the GDP adjusted
for inflation and that reflects real
outputs some other things that we use
I'll be discussing in the slides are
things like the GDP deflator at the
consumer price in there so the GDP
deflator to calculate that we put
nominal GDP over real GDP so the GDP
deflator measures how much real GDP
differs from nominal GDP we also have
the Consumer Price Index which looks at
the current price of a basket of goods
over the base price of a basket of goods
and what I mean by the base price is
what it was in the year that we've
chosen to compare it to so obviously if
you know we had a basket of goods like
when our parents were in school that
cost I don't know they say all these
dramatic figures don't they like one
Bera and now you know a basket of goods
tomatoes rice cassava whatever you put
in that basket is now like ten times the
price of course the consumer price index
will be high so we measure that against
the base year we choose the base year
where we want to compare all of the
baskets of goods to that year and then
we see how the price has risen and get a
ratio number and that reflects how the
prices have risen in the current year
compared to and then there's something
called substitution bias that I just
want to touch on because we definitely
have that in Nigeria and this is
describes the possible bias in
economic index numbers if they don't
incorporate data on consumer
expenditures switching from relatively
more expensive products to cheaper
products as the price has changed so I
think especially in Nigeria we need to
consider substitution bias when we're
looking at inflation and when we're
looking at the cost of goods and what
people are actually buying because we
find that when rice is expensive
Nigerians just switch to cassava when
cassava is expensive they switch to
something else I'm allowed whatever is
cheap and that causes a problem in
economic calculations if you're not
calculating for the fact that they've
substituted people have substituted one
it's more expensive good for another one
so another method that we use to
calculate inflation is chain weighting
and chain weighting takes into account
changes in the price and in spending
patterns so this helps us God against
substitution bias in the market because
we take into consideration the fact that
people have changed for whatever reason
from a more expensive relatively
expensive good now some of the drawbacks
of GDP so like I said at the beginning
we really obsess over GDP we talk about
GDP we think about GDP everything in the
economy leads back to GDP and it is a
good measure of the wealth of our
economy however one of my favorite
quotes about GDP comes from David
pilling and he says from a GDP
perspective nuclear warheads do just as
well as hospital beds are apple pie so
the thing about GDP is it's just
measuring output right it's not
measuring what's that output is so of
course a country could be producing
hundreds of nuclear warheads and it
would still count into GDP but they were
not have any hospitals but nobody cares
because GDP is actually just a measure
of production of anything it doesn't
matter what you are producing so it's
not the greatest measure of well-being
and I'll be talking about this on this
slide it doesn't really measure income
distribution it doesn't measure you know
Mother's for instance food the work of
full-time mothers that work in the
household cooking cleaning looking after
children and it doesn't take
externalities how people spend their
leisure time how disruptive production
activities have been to the environment
it doesn't measure social well-being and
even though there's a strong correlation
between GDP and standard of living it's
not a measure of standard of living
